---
layout: post
title:  "GSoC __init__"
date:   2024-05-18 19:24:52 +0530
categories: gsoc
---

My first blog about Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2024. In this blog I'll be talking about my project and my initial experience regarding the same.

## Introduction
My proposal named "Cytoscape layout plugin to support Cytoscape.js layouts" got accepted for GSoC 2024 and I'll be contributing towards the same for the summer of 2024 under the mentorship of "Hasan Balci" for the organisation NRNB.

# Project Description
## Project Overview
The aim of this project is to enhance the layout capabilities of Cytoscape, an open-source software platform renowned for visualizing complex networks and integrating them with attribute data. While Cytoscape offers a plethora of automatic layout algorithms such as hierarchical, circular, force-directed, and CoSE (Compound Spring Embedder), it lacks support for certain advanced layouts available in its sister project, Cytoscape.js. These layouts, including fCoSE, CoLa, and CiSE, offer features and functionalities that are not present in the layouts currently supported by Cytoscape. Therefore, the project's focal point is to bridge this gap by implementing a Cytoscape layout plugin that extends its capabilities to include layouts supported by Cytoscape.js via SyBLaRS, a web-service suitable for this purpose. By incorporating these additional layouts, users will benefit from a broader range of options for organizing and visualizing networks, enabling more sophisticated analyses and insights into complex biological and computational systems.

## Project Details

### Implementation of User Interface:
For the implementation of the user interface, the plugin will seamlessly integrate with the existing layout menu of the Cytoscape application, providing users with convenient access to the newly added layouts. Users will be able to select their desired layout from the layouts menu, which will now include the additional layouts supported by the plugin. This streamlined approach ensures ease of navigation and familiarity for users accustomed to the Cytoscape interface.

Furthermore, the settings of the layout menu will be enhanced to include specific parameters tailored to each of the new layouts. Users will have the flexibility to modify these parameters effortlessly, adjusting them to suit their specific requirements. Each layout will feature its own set of parameters and options, ensuring granularity and customization options for users seeking to fine-tune their network layouts. By offering intuitive controls within the layout menu, the plugin aims to empower users with greater control over the visualization and organization of their networks, facilitating more effective analysis and interpretation of complex data structures.

### Cytoscape.js JSON Generation:
The implementation will leverage Cytoscape's existing functionality for generating Cytoscape.js JSON, streamlining the process within the plugin. Cytoscape already provides robust features for exporting network data in the Cytoscape.js JSON format, offering a reliable foundation for our project's requirements. By utilizing this feature, the plugin will seamlessly integrate with Cytoscape's ecosystem, ensuring compatibility and consistency in data representation.

### Integration with SyBLaRS Web Service:
The integration with the SyBLaRS web service is a pivotal aspect of the plugin's functionality, enabling advanced network analysis and layout processing. The plugin will initiate communication with the SyBLaRS service via HTTP requests, facilitating the exchange of network data and layout options for analysis and processing.

